
Rosegarden-4 v0.1
=================

Rosegarden-4 is a new sequencer and musical notation editor
application.  This is an early release of the application, intended
for potential developers and other interested parties.  It is not an
application that is usable by real users yet.

Note that Rosegarden-4 is not based on Rosegarden-2.1 code and is not
yet a solution for people who find Rosegarden-2.1 in any way
unreliable or limiting.  This program is far more unreliable and far
more limiting.


Build requirements
------------------

The big requirement is KDE.  This program depends on KDE 2.>=1
(including the kdemultimedia package) and Qt 2.>=2


To compile:
-----------

If you obtained the source code from CVS :

Please read the "COMPILING" file from the KDE source code, about
compiling code from CVS. You may want to use one of the developers'
configure scripts such as "gl_configure" script (you just need to
change the Qt and KDE2 install paths according to your setup) and run
that. The important option is

CXXFLAGS="-g3 -gstabs+ -fexceptions"

before the call to 'configure', as we use exceptions in the code.

Then run "make" and, if the compile succeeds, "make install".  (The
pixmaps need to be installed to the global KDE directories before the
application will run correctly.)


If you obtained the code from the distribution tarball : 

Just run 

CXXFLAGS="-g3 -gstabs+ -fexceptions" ./configure

witht the appropriate '--with-qt-dir=...' and '--prefix=...'
options. The prefix should be the same as the one of your KDE
installation. Then proceed with "make" and "make install".

To run:
-------

Just run the rosegardengui application (found in the KDE bin directory
after installation, and also in the gui/ directory of the source tree).

To get the sequencer working properly, please read
docs/howtos/artsd-mcop-notes for instructions. The sequencer process
is started automatically on first invocation of 'play'. If you get an
error message saying it failed to connect the sequencer, try 'play'
again.



Guillaume Laurent, Chris Cannam, Richard Bown
