
Sets of events
==============

Chord
-----

A set of notes that share a common starting time.

Has no explicit representation, except as a set of note events that
have the same absoluteTime value.

Can be pulled out of a track using Track::getTimeSlice in
core/Track.h, or (with more notation-related data) using the Chord
class in rosegardengui/notationsets.h.

Group
-----

A series of events in a relationship that is normally represented in
notation by using a beam, e.g. beamed groups, tuplets, grace notes.
Not every event in the group will necessarily have to possess a beam
when it's rendered (e.g. a rest in the middle of a beamed group, or a
crotchet grace note).  Groups do not nest.

Represented internally using GroupId (int) and GroupType (string)
properties on the events, such that all events sharing a GroupId are
in the same group (and should also share the same GroupType).
Represented in XML with <group type="yyy">...</group> around the set
of events in the group; GroupId and GroupType properties should not
appear in the XML, and the GroupId is assigned to a group when the XML
is parsed.

Beamed groups can be pulled out of a track using the BeamedGroup class
in rosegardengui/notationsets.h.  There's currently no API for
extracting tupled or grace-note groups.

Tie
---

A connection made between two notes of the same pitch that should be
played as if they were a single continuous note.  Observe that the
notes don't have to adjoin in the event list, although they must
adjoin in absolute time.  For example, one of them might be part of a
chord and so other chord members might appear between the two.  It is
however unambiguous to record that a note is tied with "the following
note", because the note with which it's tied must be the next one that
has the same pitch as it.  A note can be tied with "the following
note" or "the preceding note" or both (or neither).

We don't have a representation for ties yet, although it seems
plausible that we could get away with boolean tied-forward and
tied-backward properties.

Mark
----

Some notational indication that spans a series of events.  Unlike
groups, marks can nest and overlap, and do not normally affect the way
the events they span are drawn (although of course they may affect the
way the events they span are performed).  Examples include slurs and
hairpin dynamic marks.

We don't have a representation for marks yet, although it's likely
that a mark will be a distinct type of event, appearing in the event
list immediately before the series of events it spans and with a
property indicating the duration of that series.

