
Tuplets
=======

Tuplet is a general term for series of notes played with durations
(usually) shorter than the nominal durations of the drawn notes.  The
obvious example is the triplet, in which three notes are played in the
time of two.

The terminology we use in Rosegarden 4 is: a Tuplet is a single note
within one of these series; Tupled Group (which is a special sort of
Beamed Group -- see sets.txt) is the name for the whole series.  Each
tuplet has a nominal duration, which is the duration of the note as
drawn on the score (e.g. triplet quavers have a nominal one-quaver
duration), and an effective duration, which is the duration of the
note as performed (e.g. two-thirds of a quaver).

Rosegarden 2.1 stored tuplets with their nominal type and duration,
plus some information that could be used to calculate the effective
duration.  For Rosegarden 4, in which each event has a starting time
as well as a duration (RG2.1's events were just a contiguous series,
and didn't store a starting time) it makes more sense to ensure that
the starting times of the tuplets and of the first event after the
tupled group are consistent with the stored durations.  For this
reason, Rosegarden 4 stores the effective duration of each tuplet, and
records the nominal duration separately in an event property.

(The effective duration is not necessarily exact, although for
triplets it will be.  Our base unit of time was originally 6 units to
1 hemidemisemiquaver, which meant triplets were the only tuplets that
could be guaranteed an exact representation; it's since been increased
to 60 units to the hemidemi, giving various other sorts of tuplets a
good chance of exactness, and at least a "good enough" approximation
for the listener.)

